- [Instructor] H+ Sport IT department has moved forward
with quite a few changes, adopting the use
of Tomcat, WebLogic, JBoss WildFly,
and now there's intent interest on GlassFish,
and especially using Payara's licensed support version.
So, what is the deal with Payara
and its antecedent, GlassFish?
Well, there's a long history building up to Payara
through GlassFish from many earlier servery names.
Let's step back in time for a moment
and quickly walk through this.
Back in 1996, Kiva Software released
the Kiva Enterprise Server, which was the very first
Java application server.
Interestingly, Java.10 was released that same year,
and Kiva Enterprise Server predates Tomcat,
which was first released in 1998.
Kiva customers included Bank of America,
E-Trade, Travelocity, Internet Shopping Network,
Hong Kong Telecom and a few others,
but their success came with a price.
In 1997, Netscape acquired Kiva
and renamed the app server the Netscape Application Server,
or NAS.
NAS, again, grew in popularity when, in 1999,
Sun and Netscape form an alliance
and released NAS4 including early support for a version
of J2EE API with serverless CJBs, JSPs, and JDBC.
Sun Microsystems had their own server at the time
called NetDynamics, and for a while,
there was thought about merging the libraries with NAS4.
Instead, NAS4 was renamed to iPlanet Application Server 5.
Netscape became AOL and Sun continued
to support the iPlanet suite.
In 2002, this alliance between AOL
that started with Netscape and Sun ended
and Sun parted, taking with them the iPlanet
and renaming it to the Stanford University Network
Open Net Environment Application Server.
Phew, what a mouthful.
Luckily, this was done so they could call it
the Sun ONE Application Server Version 7 for short.
I'll let you absorb that for a moment.
Interestingly, this new Sun ONE App Server Version 7
was closed source, but it now contained source code
from Tomcat 4, which was open-source.
For version 8, the name was changed again
to Sun Java Application Server Version 8,
and it was declared J2EE 1.4 compatible.
At this, Sun began calling this
the reference implementation.
Okay, moving right along.
In 2005, the open-source project GlassFish was formed,
and the source code from SJSAS9 was donated
to the project GlassFish Application Server.
In 2006, version one of GlassFish was released,
declaring that it was Java EE 5 compatible.
From there, two more versions were released in 2011.
Sun Microsystems was acquired by Oracle.
Oracle already had acquired WebLogic,
so there was a number of questions
to the fate of GlassFish.
Oracle continued making bug fixes and released GlassFish 4,
which was Java EE 7 compatible,
but it included no major updates to the functionality.
The question concerning GlassFish's fate were right
to be asked because Oracle announced a couple
of years later, in 2017, that it no longer wanted
to be responsible for JavaEE and/or GlassFish anymore.
So, in 2018, a deal was made between Oracle
and Eclipse Foundation to transfer GlassFish as EE4J,
to which it happened.
The deal between Oracle and Eclipse
included a further release at version 5.1,
completely rebuilt by Eclipse organization
with relicensed components, making GlassFish
fully Java EE 8 certified.
This is where Payara enters the picture.
Payara Services began assisting in the code transfer
with the Eclipse Foundation,
specifically contributing to transferring
of several API projects and associated implementations.
By the way, Payara is the name
for a fish found in the Amazon basin,
sometimes called the vampire fish
because of its long fangs.
Of course, this does not mean
that Payara App Server is sucking the life from GlassFish,
but actually, breathing new life into the framework,
which, as you can see, GlassFish has had many names
and transitional software forms in its past lives.
The Payara App Server is a fork of GlassFish,
under Eclipse Foundation, and a drop-in replacement
for GlassFish as well.
Payara includes quarterly bug fixes and improvements
that outpace the current GlassFish release schedule.
The other nice piece here is Payara's support service plan.
You can use the app server for free or by support.
Because Oracle is not providing paid support anymore
for GlassFish, most organizations need to manage the risks
of unsupported servers.
Payara is a great choice, especially if your environment
is already based on GlassFish.